Improving default string globalization experience (#207)
dotnet/designs: accepted/2021/default_string_globalization.md

That GitHub issue describes various options we were considering, including relying solely on Roslyn analyzers or providing runtime compatibility switches. None of these issues is very palatable because they either force the developers to think about globalization concerns or they make it difficult for library authors to reason about what behaviors their components will exhibit at runtime.

This draft proposes an alternate solution which attempts to provide the best of all worlds: steering new developers toward success, letting people with existing code bases know when they have issues, and allowing existing compiled DLLs to work largely as expected.

## Characteristics of an ideal solution

An ideal solution to this problem should have two qualities.

1. `string` and related APIs should default to ordinal behavior unless the caller makes an explicit request for a different behavior.

> 2. Developers should not be exposed to any globalization-related concepts unless they explicitly seek globalization support.

Reviewer: Is this claim specific to APIs on String?  For example, how does this relate to formatting/parsing APIs on types like Int32, DateTime, etc., which all factor in the current culture by default?

Author: Perhaps I should clarify this. The concept of "ordinal" only applies to APIs which operate on or transform strings / sequences of chars. (Think: `ReadOnlySpan<char>` APIs in `MemoryExtensions`.)

For APIs which are about changing representation between string and non-string types (e.g., _string_ \<-\> _int_), I don't suggest any behavioral change. These APIs necessarily have to perform some kind of linguistic translation, so they may as well fall back to _current culture_ as they do today. That also helps solidify `Parse` and `ToString` as helpers for "please convert this data from / to a representation which is understandable by the current user."

Reviewer: > The concept of "ordinal" only applies to APIs which operate on or transform strings / sequences of chars.

Yes.  I was commenting on the second goal/requirement: "Developers should not be exposed to any globalization-related concepts unless they explicitly seek globalization support."  There are many globalization-related concepts unrelated to ordinal.

> The first characteristic is fairly straightforward. APIs like `string.Compare`, `string.Contains`, `string.Equals`, `string.IndexOf`, and others should all behave in an ordinal fashion. Developers shouldn't have to rely on Roslyn analyzers or MSDN to know what behavior a given API has.

Reviewer 2: MSDN doesn't exist anymore :)

```suggestion
The first characteristic is fairly straightforward. APIs like `string.Compare`, `string.Contains`, `string.Equals`, `string.IndexOf`, and others should all behave in an ordinal fashion. Developers shouldn't have to rely on Roslyn analyzers or docs.microsoft.com to know what behavior a given API has.
```

The second characteristic requires a bit more explanation. Popular programming languages like Java, JavaScript, Go, Python, C/C++, and others treat string APIs as ordinal. .NET is unique in that we build globalization concepts directly into many basic `string` APIs. Unfortunately, evidence shows that .NET's behavior in this regard is largely unexpected and confusing to our developer audience.

> [Java 16's `String` class](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html) (which is the closest to .NET's `string` class) is a good example of this principle. Per their own documentation:

Reviewer 3: It's good that we're looking to learn from other ecosystems. Is there anything we can learn from the other ecosystems you mention above, beyond your note that they separate string from globalization? (Go, Rust etc)

Author: Oh, absolutely. Most other ecosystems also enforce opinionated behaviors regarding UTF-8 string well-formedness. But that continues to be a point of contention for us. ;)

Reviewer 4: I think an important thing to keep in mind about scenarios like `Rust` is that they design most of their types around the principle of "zero cost abstraction": <https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch00-00-introduction.html#people-who-value-speed-and-stability>
> Rust is for people who crave speed and stability in a language. By speed, we mean the speed of the programs that you can create with Rust and the speed at which Rust lets you write them. The Rust compiler’s checks ensure stability through feature additions and refactoring. This is in contrast to the brittle legacy code in languages without these checks, which developers are often afraid to modify. By striving for zero-cost abstractions, higher-level features that compile to lower-level code as fast as code written manually, Rust endeavors to make safe code be fast code as well.

So while things like `str` are always sliced to valid UTF-8 (unless using one of the `unchecked` slicing methods), they ensure the relevant other components are exposed to allow working with and dealing with "raw parts", that is the `bytes` rather than `runes` (to put it into .NET terms) so power users have the ability to do things themselves when and as appropriate.

Likewise, I don't believe rust has a case insensitive comparer in `std` today. You need to pull it in through an external crate (basically `nupkg`) and specify it as the comparer to use in your `match` expressions (in this way, its more like `IComparer`, but where the implementation is a `struct` and done via generic specialization so its "zero cost" and inlining/etc happen).

// or you can pass a Locale instance if you don't want to use the current locale
// Java's Locale.ROOT is roughly equivalent to .NET's CultureInfo.InvariantCulture
String s3 = s.toUpperCase(Locale.ROOT);
String s4 = s.toLowerCase(Locale.ROOT);
```

And even though these are the only two linguistic-by-default APIs on Java's `String` type, problematic usage of them is still so widespread that CERT's coding rules for Java [forbid calling the parameterless overloads](https://wiki.sei.cmu.edu/confluence/display/java/STR02-J.+Specify+an+appropriate+locale+when+comparing+locale-dependent+data). This CERT rule STR02-J is roughly equivalent to .NET's [CA1310 rule](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/fundamentals/code-analysis/quality-rules/ca1310), which flags certain overloads of `string` APIs as problematic.

Put another way, the second characteristic mentioned above might be paraphrased as "developers shouldn't be exposed to globalization-related concerns unless they have imported the _System.Globalization_ namespace into their file."

## Proposed solution

To solve this problem for the .NET ecosystem at large, we propose to take the following actions on `string`.

> 1. Obsolete (as warning) all linguistic-by-default methods on `string` with a new __SYSLIBxxxx__ identifier.

Reviewer 4: I'd really like to see 1. be `Create fixers to migrate call sites` and 2. to be `Obsolete (as warning)`

Having a fixer is critical IMO and the most important part considering how widespread the existing methods are.

2. Mark all newly-obsoleted methods as `[EditorBrowsable(EditorBrowsableState.Never)]`.
3. Mark all methods which take a `CultureInfo` parameter as `[EditorBrowsable(EditorBrowsableState.Never)]`, but do not obsolete them.
4. Add simple ordinal overloads for all obsoleted methods. (These overloads _should not_ take `StringComparison` as a parameter. More on this later.)
5. Add simple "ignore case" ordinal overloads for all methods which currently don't have them.
6. Create fixers to migrate call sites from the now-obsoleted methods onto newer methods.

And we propose to take the following actions on `string`-like APIs.

> 1. Mark all linguistic-related APIs as `[EditorBrowsable(EditorBrowsableState.Never)]`, but do not obsolete them. (Exception: do not mark APIs if they're in the _System.Globalization_ namespace.)

Reviewer: Related to my previous comment, how does this relate to methods that implement interfaces or override virtuals? e.g. Int32.ToString() factoring in the current current.  The point earlier talked about not needing to understand globalization concepts... was that too broad, and this is all really just about linguistics-related globalization concepts?

2. Create analyzers to detect `Comparer<string>.Default`, `new SortedSet<string>()`, and similar code patterns that implicitly rely on the current culture.

> ### List of API obsoletions and additions

Reviewer 5: Are we going to release an updated version of netstandard or are the developers targetting multiple versions going to be faced with warnings everywhere?

Reviewer 6: I think the challenge here is we are going to have a new APIs which will be in .NET 6.0 and up. I don't think we can add these to the netstandard. 

CC @terrajobst

Author: These wouldn't be in standard. If you're multi-targeting, I believe per the way this proposal is written, the only methods that would be marked `[Obsolete]` are methods that the code analyzers CA1307 and CA1310 would have flagged anyway as likely incorrect usage. A significant number of methods would be marked EB-never but wouldn't produce warnings.

-    public static int Compare(System.String? strA, int indexA, System.String? strB, int indexB, int length, bool ignoreCase, System.Globalization.CultureInfo? culture) { throw null; }
-    public static int Compare(System.String? strA, int indexA, System.String? strB, int indexB, int length, System.Globalization.CultureInfo? culture, System.Globalization.CompareOptions options) { throw null; }
     public static int Compare(System.String? strA, int indexA, System.String? strB, int indexB, int length, System.StringComparison comparisonType) { throw null; }
-    public static int Compare(System.String? strA, System.String? strB) { throw null; }
-    public static int Compare(System.String? strA, System.String? strB, bool ignoreCase) { throw null; }
-    public static int Compare(System.String? strA, System.String? strB, bool ignoreCase, System.Globalization.CultureInfo? culture) { throw null; }
-    public static int Compare(System.String? strA, System.String? strB, System.Globalization.CultureInfo? culture, System.Globalization.CompareOptions options) { throw null; }

> +    public static int CompareString(System.String? strA, System.String? strB) { throw null; }

Reviewer 7: It feels weird that `string` will be two times in the sentence when calling these APIs (`string.CompareString`) I guess there is no better naming/options?... I definitely like this better than including `Ordinal` in the name though.

Author: Downside is that the good names were taken by the method we want to steer people away from. :(

Reviewer 8: Yeah this is the thing that urks me. Our goal is to present the developer with a simpler view of the world, but the new names look fairly misplaced and odd :-(

Reviewer 9: In PowerShell repo we follow simple rule - "use explicitly culture/ordinal/ignorecase everywhere".
You will find that this code is full of explicit Ordinal and OrdinalIgnorecase names
This makes the code incredibly understandable and maintainable.
Despite this, we've fixed a few case of unexpected use of culture. So the PR with new conception is great!

But the new names looks weird for me too.
As I said, having Ordinal and OrdinalIgnorecase names in PowerShell code makes it better in my opinion.
Notice, we already have CompareOrdinal(). Why not follow this pattern?
```
CompareToString -> CompareToOrdinal
CompareToStringIgnoreCase -> CompareToOrdinalIgnoreCase
```
And this is completely consistent with the new concept. 
It also makes it easier to learn and understand for people coming from other languages.

+    public static System.StringComparer Normal { get { throw null; } } // aliases Ordinal
+    public static System.StringComparer IgnoreCase { get { throw null; } } // aliases OrdinalIgnoreCase
     public int Compare(object? x, object? y) { throw null; }
     public abstract int Compare(string? x, string? y);
-    public static System.StringComparer Create(System.Globalization.CultureInfo culture, bool ignoreCase) { throw null; }
-    public static System.StringComparer Create(System.Globalization.CultureInfo culture, System.Globalization.CompareOptions options) { throw null; }
     public new bool Equals(object? x, object? y) { throw null; }
     public abstract bool Equals(string? x, string? y);
     public static System.StringComparer FromComparison(System.StringComparison comparisonType) { throw null; }
     public int GetHashCode(object obj) { throw null; }
     public abstract int GetHashCode(string obj);
 }
 public enum StringComparison
 {
-    CurrentCulture = 0,
-    CurrentCultureIgnoreCase = 1,
-    InvariantCulture = 2,
-    InvariantCultureIgnoreCase = 3,
-    Ordinal = 4,
-    OrdinalIgnoreCase = 5,
+    Normal = 4, // aliases Ordinal

> +    IgnoreCase = 5, // aliases OrdinalIgnoreCase

Reviewer 4: What's the replacement for `CurrentCulture` and `InvariantCulture`?

How will this impact cases like `CompareOptions.NumericOrdering`: <https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/13979#issuecomment-297115553>?

How will this impact cases like `RemoveStart` and `RemoveEnd`: <https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/14386>

Reviewer 6: To use CompareInfo instead for the operation. e.g. `CultureInfo.CurrentCulture.CompareInfo.Compare(...)`. I think we need to revisit [https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/13979](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/13979) or at least will make NumericOrdering is cultural independent. 

---
In reply to: [615181346](https://github.com/dotnet/designs/pull/207#discussion_r615181346) [](ancestors = 615181346)

Reviewer: I don't understand why we would make this so much harder when you do want CurrentCulture{IgnoreCase}.  The concern expressed in this doc is around the defaults and the inconsistency with defaults we currently expose.  But with StringComparison/StringComparer, a developer is explicitly specifying which they want.  I don't see only downside to changing this.

Reviewer 8: I kind with @stephentoub. Having `Normal` and `IgnoreCase` present on `StringComparer` seems sufficient as it maps to the methods. Using the enum/comparer is already the advanced mode, so hiding the other concepts feels a bit like we're trying too hard to be helpful.

 }
```

## A note on `StringComparison` and `StringComparer`

> One notable aspect of this proposal is the complete restructuring of the `StringComparison` and `StringComparer` types. It is important to note that all members of these types will be preserved. The proposal here is to hide all existing fields / static properties and to create new "simpler" names _Normal_ and _IgnoreCase_. Both of these additions alias their ordinal siblings.

Reviewer 6: May be it is worth mentioning whoever want to create a linguistic StringComparer, can call the extension method `CompareInfo.GetStringComparer`. This will be explicit as it will be created from the CompareInfo which show the intend of using the linguistic functionality.

> Note: the following paragraphs are speculative. They're based on reasonable lines of thought, but we have not performed the work to draw a conclusive link.

While searching through internal and public sources, we discovered significant usage of the members `StringComparison.InvariantCulture` and `StringComparison.InvariantCultureIgnoreCase`. The usage numbers for these APIs is much higher than would be reasonably expected given their scenario of performing linguistic (somewhat "fuzzy") text matching. This may be explained as an interesting byproduct of having drilled [__CA1305__](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/fundamentals/code-analysis/quality-rules/ca1305) (specify `CultureInfo.InvariantCulture` when calling `ToString(IFormatProvider, ...)`) and ["prefer `string.ToUpperInvariant` over `string.ToUpper`"](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.string.toupper) into developers' muscle memory over the past decades. This can form a positive association that makes developers believe that __"invariant"__ is always an appropriate default to use.

> So when rules like [__CA1307__](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/fundamentals/code-analysis/quality-rules/ca1307) (pass an explicit `StringComparison` value) are enforced, the developer is now forced to choose between ordinal, invariant, or current-culture. It is not reasonable to expect the average developer to understand the difference between ordinal and linguistic behavior. But it _is_ reasonable for an average developer to think to themselves, "I was told _invariant_ was correct in all other situations where I encountered it. It must also be the appropriate default here.". (It would further be reasonable that this decision may be made via muscle memory, with the developer never consciously realizing that they were presented a choice.)

Reviewer: I don't see the argument for hiding CurrentCulture/CurrentCultureIgnoreCase.  If someone explicitly types "CurrentCulture", that's what they get; it's very clear.

Console.WriteLine(songLyrics.EndsWith("goodbye"));
```

As a minor concern, developers working in an interactive debugger (think VS's Immediate window) will not see any obsoletion messages that we put on our public API surface. If they enter `theStr.IndexOf("foo")` into the Immediate window, that will evaluate in a linguistic, current-culture context. This is not strictly a behavioral change from previous runtimes, but it could be slightly confusing to developers who have the old patterns engrained into their muscle memory and who rely on our warnings and fixers for guidance.

Finally, we cannot rely on analyzers and fixers alone to detect when a linguistic, current-culture call is about to be made. If a `string` instance is passed around as `object` and some consumer has code which reads `if (obj is IComparable comparable) { comparable.CompareTo(...); }`, there's not much we can do about this. If it's too unpalatable to change the underlying behavior of `string` itself, then the best we can do is direct people to use a modern API surface and generic collections, avoiding non-generic methods like `Array.Sort(Array)`.

## Future work and ecosystem implications

> This work has implications for GUI stacks, such as WPF and WinForms. GUI scenarios often involve performing linguistic, current-culture collation of data, such as alphabetically sorting entries in a dropdown list. It should be expected that WinForms, WPF, and similar code bases will be disproportionately hit with warnings. They have a few options available to them. In descending order of preference:

Reviewer: > similar code bases will be disproportionately hit with warnings

Not only hit with warnings, but there's a good chance pushing them to use ordinal behavior will actually introduce bugs.

Author: That's the weird part about all of this. The rule of thumb is: if you're sorting data for display directly in client UI, the default (_current culture_) behavior is probably appropriate. If you're on a server, a current culture comparison is probably not appropriate. So it largely depends on the context.

However, there is one universal truth: __the pattern `if (string.Compare(...) == 0)` is almost certainly a bug__, regardless of context. There are exceptions, sure, but they're very rare.

Maybe the answer is that we don't hide the original methods, but we instead query what you're doing with the result. If we see a comparison result `== 0` or `!= 0` we flag it. This will catch fewer misusages of the comparison APIs, but experience tells me that the warnings will be more actionable / of higher quality.
